Meta-VEP: Validation admission policy (#324)
kubevirt/enhancements: veps/meta-VEPs/323-validation-admission-policy/vep.md

Reviewer: I would consider classifying it under "control-plan" or "compute" SIGs, and not limit it to just the policy.
We can phase it and build a policy, followed with the steps to implement.

In a simplified form, moving from a policy to implementation should be simple.

- **Operational burden**: webhooks require a running, reachable service. If virt-api is unavailable,
  all mutating and validating operations on KubeVirt resources are blocked.
- **Complexity**: webhook code is imperative Go, which is harder to review, test, and reason about
  than declarative validation rules.
- **Scalability**: every admission request requires a network round-trip to the webhook service.
- **Maintenance cost**: as KubeVirt grows, the webhook codebase grows with it, making it harder to maintain.

Kubernetes introduced [ValidatingAdmissionPolicies](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/)
(GA since Kubernetes 1.30) as a declarative, in-process alternative to admission webhooks.
VAPs use [CEL](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/cel/) expressions evaluated directly
by the API server - no network hop, no external service dependency.

Additionally, kubebuilder validation markers (e.g., `+kubebuilder:validation:Minimum`, `+kubebuilder:validation:Enum`)
offer OpenAPI schema-level validation for simple, invariant field constraints.

This VEP establishes when to use each mechanism.

## Goals

> - Establish a clear, documented policy for choosing between kubebuilder markers, VAPs, and webhooks.

Reviewer: Can we include in this VEP guidance or rules on when to have the validation only in the controller reconciliation only?
I believe it is a good opportunity to question the imperative approach taken on some of the validations.

- Migrate existing webhook validations to VAPs iteratively over time.
- Reduce KubeVirt's dependency on admission webhooks for validation.

## Non Goals

- Define a specific timeline or release target for migrating all existing validations.

>   Migration should be done iteratively with no pressure.

Reviewer: If we define phases and steps, we can define it well enough to see actual results pretty fast. After a policy is agreed and established, it should be pretty straight forward to convert most validations to declarative ones.

The review commitment would be the challenging part, but I think it can be reduced by providing good unit testing.

- Discuss the specifics of individual validations (each migration can be handled in its own PR).
- Replace mutating admission webhooks - this VEP only covers validation.

## Definition of Users

- **KubeVirt developers**: who implement and review validation logic.
- **KubeVirt reviewers/approvers**: who review PRs that add or modify validation.
- **Cluster administrators**: who manage KubeVirt deployments and may need to understand validation behavior.

## User Stories

- As a KubeVirt developer, I want a clear guideline for where to implement validation logic
  so that I don't have to make ad-hoc decisions on each PR.

> - As a KubeVirt reviewer, I want a documented policy to point to when reviewing PRs
>   that add validation in the wrong place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As a KubeVirt reviewer, I want a documented policy that I can use to assure validations land in the most appropiate location.
```

- As a cluster administrator, I want validations to work even if the virt-api webhook service
  is temporarily unavailable.

## Repos

- kubevirt/kubevirt

## Design

### Three-tier validation policy

Validation in KubeVirt should use the following mechanisms, in order of preference:

#### 1. Kubebuilder markers (OpenAPI schema validation)

Use kubebuilder validation markers **only** for simple, single-field constraints

> that are certain to never change. Examples:

Reviewer: I suggest to list only things we know is a fit. Negative integers is a great example.

Do you know if there are actual Kubernetes guidelines in this area?

Reviewer 2: On the guidelines question: the [API change doc](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md) ("On compatibility") covers this, and it's directional. Tightening (narrowing a range, dropping an enum value) is the breaking case; adding an enum value needs care for client/component skew, but that's true wherever the rule lives — so I don't think it justifies ruling out Enum wholesale.

Reviewer 3: +1 on a specific list, there aren't that many markers, too.

- A string field that must not be empty
- An integer field that must not be negative

These constraints are baked into the CRD's OpenAPI schema. Once published,

> they are effectively permanent - changing them is a breaking API change.

Reviewer 3: Permanent implies it can never change, which is not entirely true...

Reviewer: Due to their effect on the clients, in practice a change will have a chance to break clients. See https://github.com/iholder101/kubevirt-enhancements/pull/1 for more information.

Therefore, use them conservatively and only for true invariants.

**Do not** use kubebuilder markers for constraints that may evolve over time. Examples of what to avoid:

- `+kubebuilder:validation:Minimum` / `+kubebuilder:validation:Maximum` - acceptable ranges tend to change as
  requirements evolve (e.g., a port field might later need to allow 0 for auto-assignment).
- `+kubebuilder:validation:Enum` - enum values almost always grow over time. Adding a new value
  to a kubebuilder enum is a breaking schema change.

> 

Reviewer 2: I'd not discourage structural markers (Enum/Minimum/Maximum) here — we already ship plenty (Enum=kvm;hyperv-direct, Enum=VersionTLS10;..., Minimum, Pattern), so a blanket "use conservatively" sits awkwardly with current practice, and these self-contained constraints are exactly what the schema is for.

On the breaking-change rationale: the [API change guidelines](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md) ("On compatibility") are directional. Tightening (narrowing a range, dropping an enum value) makes valid values invalid and is the breaking case — and it's breaking wherever the rule lives, including a VAP, so evolvability isn't an argument for VAP over a marker. Adding an enum value does need care for client/component skew, so "breaking" isn't unreasonable — but "enums almost always grow" is too absolute (many encode a fixed set). And moving an enum to a VAP doesn't help: the skew risk is that an older component doesn't understand a new value, which is true wherever the validation lives. The VAP just hides the value from the schema — losing discoverability without reducing the risk. With ratcheting (default since 1.30, caveats noted) the simple cases are reasonably safe to add even to existing fields.

Use VAPs for these validations instead.

**Note on existing markers**: KubeVirt already has kubebuilder validation markers that do not meet

> the above criteria. Removing them would be a breaking API change, so they will remain as-is.

Reviewer: I am not sure if removing them will be a breaking change.
If the validation will move to a different mechanism, I think we could remove them after a few versions.

Maybe we need to think and plan it a bit.
On the other hand, maybe it is not worth the effort.

This policy applies to new markers going forward.

> #### 2. ValidatingAdmissionPolicies (VAPs)

Reviewer: I have updated https://github.com/iholder101/kubevirt-enhancements/pull/1 to include a section about the option to embed CEL (usually simple one) into the CRD as an alternative to a VAP.

In theory, this means we have another mechanism here which is server-side-only and combines the advantages of both worlds and drops most cons.

Reviewer 2: +1
This is the piece I think is missing from the tiers as written. CRD CEL (`x-kubernetes-validations`) is the natural home for most of what Tier 2 lists: cross-field, immutability/transition (`oldSelf`), and complex single-field rules are all expressible in the schema, not just in a VAP. It also largely dissolves the decomposition concern I raised below — if self-contained checks live with the field as CRD CEL, there's no "how do 100+ checks carve into VAP objects" problem for the bulk of them.

So I'd treat this as more than an alternative to a VAP — arguably the _default_ for self-contained validation, with VAP as the step up when you need cluster config. Worth pulling into the VEP's tiering directly rather than leaving it in iholder101#1, since it changes where most validations land.

Use VAPs for **most** validations. This includes:

- Multi-field validations (e.g., "if field A is set, field B must also be set")
- Complex single-field validations that may evolve over time
- Cross-field consistency checks
- Validations that depend on the object's current state (`oldSelf` vs `self`)
- Immutability checks
- Any validation that is not a true invariant

> 

Reviewer 2: This is the piece I'd most want pinned down. If you classify the existing admitters by what each check actually needs, it comes out roughly: ~55% self-contained (object only — single-field, cross-field, immutability), ~25% gated on cluster config/feature flags, ~20% genuinely procedural or needing live state. (Rough classification, but the shape is clear)

Tier 2 explicitly lists cross-field, multi-field, and immutability checks as VAP cases ("the right default for nearly all validation logic"), and Tier 1 is restricted to single-field invariants — so the self-contained majority (most of which is cross-field, not single-field) lands in VAPs by definition. On the VMI alone that's 100+ validation expressions becoming VAPs, and the doc doesn't say how they're organized into policy objects. @vladikr raised exactly this in [#16708](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/16708) ("a large VAP with many validations will become cluttered and hard to maintain," and "maybe per admitter?" — unresolved). One big policy vs. many small ones trade maintainability against a pile of policies and bindings for virt-operator to reconcile.

My actual suggestion: for self-contained checks, default to the schema (markers / CRD CEL) rather than VAPs — which sidesteps the decomposition question for the bulk of them, since the rule lives with the field. Reserve VAPs for the config/feature-gate cases (the ~25%), where a param-backed policy genuinely fits.

VAPs are declarative, evaluated in-process by the API server, and can be updated

> without code changes. They are the right default for nearly all validation logic.

Reviewer 2: This says VAPs "can be updated without code changes," but the lifecycle section (and Option 1's own Cons, lines 189–190) says all customization goes through a KubeVirt CR knob, which is code plus a release. Those point in opposite directions. I think "no code changes" is true of a VAP as a raw Kubernetes object, but not of one that's operator-reconciled the way this VEP proposes. Reconciliation reverts manual edits, so the only durable change is a code change. Could the benefit be restated to match the management model? As written it reads as a flexibility the design actually gives up.

#### 3. Admission webhooks

Use webhooks **only** as a last resort, when VAPs cannot express the validation. Examples:

> - Validations that require API calls to other resources (e.g., checking if a feature gate is enabled)

Reviewer: > checking if a feature gate is enabled

I have an idea on how we can drop these as well.
But we can take this to a follow up in order not to overload this VEP.

Reviewer 2: Yeah VAPs should be able to get the KubeVirt CR via `paramRef`

- Validations that require complex procedural logic not expressible in CEL
- Validations with dependencies on external state

> When a webhook is necessary, the PR should document why a VAP is insufficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider admission webhooks as an exception. The VEP/implementation should reason why the other alternatives methods are insufficient.
```

### VAP lifecycle management

VAPs are managed by virt-operator and continuously reconciled, just like other
operator-managed resources (RBAC, Deployments, etc.).

This means:
- VAPs are created and updated by virt-operator as part of the normal reconciliation loop.
- Manual modifications to operator-managed VAPs are reverted on the next reconciliation cycle.
- Upgrades naturally apply VAP changes as part of the operator's desired-state reconciliation.

> If an administrator needs to customize validation behavior, the proper mechanism is

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should allow expression modification in any way. Enforcement controls are fine though (maybe), e.g., controlling `Deny/Warn/Audit`.

Reviewer 4: combined with the current dislike for any knobs this makes it a major issue. There needs to be a way how to at least control `Deny/Warn/Audit` indeed, otherwise this is just blocking admins completely.
Not sure why Option 3 below was dismissed, that would work too.

Reviewer: The discussion here was mainly in comparison to the validation we perform today through CRD markers and admission webhooks.
These are usually not configurable, however in some cases they do depend on external inputs (e.g. the Kubevirt CR).
I am guessing that @iholder101 attempted to solve these cases here.

The extensibility option is touching a totally different area.
I am unsure if it fits in this VEP, as this proposal is not reducing the existing options (i.e. an admin could not change the validation on-the-fly).

We can treat it as a follow up IMO.

a configuration knob in the KubeVirt CR, not direct VAP modification.

> The operator then uses these configuration values when generating the VAPs.

Reviewer: Is this an extension to the current code-base implementation?
If it just preserves what already exists, a real example would be nice to understand the source of this.
If it is a new extended options, I would recomend it for a follow up.

This ensures admin intent is captured declaratively and survives upgrades.

The specifics of which configuration knobs to expose are left to individual feature PRs.

### Migration strategy

Existing webhook validations should be migrated to VAPs iteratively.

> There is no fixed timeline or release target for completing the migration.

Reviewer: In practice, this hints that it may never finish.
I would prefer a plan and targeting the implementation of each per version.

I find the main challenge in curating the policy and less in the implenentation.

> When migrating a validation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating a validation from webhook to policy based:
```

> 1. Implement the VAP equivalent.
> 2. Add functional tests for the VAP-based validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add unit tests for the existing validation in the form of a manifest (yaml) input.
2. Implement the VAP equivalent.
3. Assure the same input manifest passes the VAP-based validation.
```

> 3. Remove the corresponding webhook validation logic.

Reviewer: - Is this happening in the same version bump?
- There is a need to assure the VEP is deployed before webhooks are removed. Can this be done?

Each migration can be handled in its own PR. There is no need to migrate all validations at once.

## API Examples

No API changes are proposed. VAPs are standard Kubernetes resources deployed by virt-operator.

## Alternatives

### VAP reconciliation strategies

This VEP proposes continuous reconciliation by virt-operator (option 1 below).
Two alternatives were considered:

#### Option 1: Continuous reconciliation (chosen)

virt-operator creates and continuously reconciles all VAPs, reverting any manual changes.
Admin customization goes through the KubeVirt CR.

**Pros:**
- Upgrades are clean - operator ensures VAPs match the desired state for the current version.
- Consistent with how KubeVirt manages other resources (RBAC, Deployments).
- No drift between expected and actual validation state.

> - Consistent with the ecosystem - Gatekeeper, Kyverno, and OpenShift operators all use this pattern.

Reviewer: Is the vendor specific operator necesery here?

**Cons:**

> - Administrators cannot directly modify VAPs for quick, ad-hoc changes.

Reviewer 3: As stated in a previous comment, I don't necessarily see this as a con. If a user is trying to work around a validation, it hints at a gap in our supported configuration or validation logic. Also I'm not aware of escape hatches for VAPs being commonplace in the wild (AFAIK, it's an install-time boolean decision of whether to deploy them or not in most cases).

  must manually review and merge upstream changes on upgrade, or risk running
  outdated validation logic.
- Provides a false sense of control - most administrators will not track upstream
  VAP changes across releases.
- Adds complexity to the operator (annotation checking, partial reconciliation).
- Creates a support burden - debugging validation issues requires checking which
  VAPs are managed and which are not.

### Kubebuilder markers for client-side dry-run

An alternative to the conservative use of kubebuilder markers proposed above is to
use them more broadly, including for validations that may change over time,
in order to enable client-side dry-run (`kubectl apply --dry-run=client`).

This was rejected because kubebuilder markers are baked into the CRD's OpenAPI schema.
Once published, changing them is a breaking API change - clients that depend on the schema
will break. Server-side dry-run (`kubectl apply --dry-run=server`) activates all validation
including VAPs, and should be used instead.

Kubebuilder markers should therefore be reserved for truly immutable field constraints
where we are confident the validation will never change.

> 

Reviewer 2: I'd reframe this around discoverability rather than dry-run. The durable benefit of schema validation isn't client-side dry-run — it's that the constraint is visible: kubectl explain, generated clients, and offline validators all read the schema, and a VAP is invisible to all of them. That affects how easily someone understands a type's constraints without hunting through separate policy objects (see @xpivarc's comment [here](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/16708#issuecomment-3839924590) about "dispersing where one needs to look to understand API"). Worth weighing whenever a rule could live in either place.

### Webhooks only (status quo)

Continuing to use admission webhooks for all validation logic.

**Pros:**
- No migration effort.
- Full flexibility (arbitrary Go code).

**Cons:**
- All the drawbacks listed in [Motivation](#motivation) persist and grow with the codebase.
- KubeVirt does not benefit from the operational improvements that VAPs provide.

## Scalability

VAPs are evaluated in-process by the API server. This eliminates the network round-trip
required by webhooks, improving validation latency and reducing the load on virt-api.

No scalability issues are expected.

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

VAPs are continuously reconciled by virt-operator. On upgrade, the operator applies
the new version's VAPs as part of its normal reconciliation loop. On rollback,

> the previous version's operator restores its own VAPs.

Reviewer: - In practice, there is no support for rollback.
- However, a scenario in which we will be interested in dropping a VAP (or replacing it with another) raises the question on how and when old ones are removed. It will fit this section IMO.

No update/rollback compatibility issues are expected.

> ## Functional Testing Approach

Reviewer: Why not unit tests?
We do not really need to check that VAPs work, we can assume they are.
If we need to test anything, is the CEL or other content they have been programmed to apply.

VAP-based validations should be tested via functional tests that exercise the API server's
admission path, verifying that invalid requests are rejected with the expected error messages.

Existing webhook validation tests can be reused with minimal changes, since the test
assertions (create/update a resource and expect rejection) remain the same regardless

> of the underlying mechanism.

Reviewer: Such tests are too expensive and probably do not worth having.
I suggest we focus our efforts on unit tests unless something critical in the path is missed.

We could create some integration tests, which are somewhere in between the unit and functional ones. But I do not think it is worth it.
